- Bitterness and sourness, both associated with wild foods, are often signals of health-giving properties.
    - The orange varieties selected had low levels of phenols, bitter-tasting (but also health-giving) compounds. This meant they appealed to the increasingly sweet global palate, but left the global crop more vulnerable to pests and diseases because the bitter chemicals present in wild citrus such as *memang narang* are a big part of the plant’s natural defenses. As we reduce these compounds in our quest for more sweetness, farmers have to compensate and protect the fruit with more chemical sprays.
- The human diet has undergone more change in the last 150 years (roughly 6 generations) than in the entire previous one million years (around 40,000 generations). And in the last half a century, trade, technology and corporate power have extended these dietary changes right across the world.
- The richer our gut microbiomes (the trillions of bacteria, fungi and other microbes we all host) the better for us. And the more diverse our diets, the richer our gut microbiomes become.
- Funded by the Rockefeller Foundation, farmers were handed free supplies of seeds, fertilisers and pesticides; agriculture in Turkey underwent more change in a single generation than it had in five hundred years. — **a lot of the “Green Revolution” was funded by American companies. There is a lot of American influence to transition to planting cash crops to be sold on the global market rather than local varieties of plants.** By participating in the global agricultural market, farmers worldwide are now depending on the global market rather than feeding local communities directly.
    - What became known as the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) in the Phillippines was funded by the American Rockefeller and Ford Foundations. The IRRI’s plant breeders also made a breakthrough drawing on the genetics of a dwarf plan. This new pest-resistant, high-yielding rice, called IR8, was released across India, Pakistan and Bangladesh in 1966. Using the Green Revolution package of irrigation, fertilizers and pesticides, IR8 tripled yields and became known as ‘miracle rice’. As it rapidly spread across Asia (with the necessary agrichemicals subsidized by Western foundations and governments), farmers were encouraged to abandon their landrace varieties…
- Permaculture rules — rather than monocultures, we should be growing compatible crops with each other. We fundamentally **do not need** the use of additional fertilizers or irrigation if the plants are well adapted to the local environment.
    - In the milpa system, mize is planted with its companions, beans and squashes, its stalks creating a frame for the beans to climb and the broad leaves of the squash giving ground cover, conserving moisture in the soil and suppressing weeds. But the most important feature of the milpa is what happens below ground; the leguminous roots of the bean are host to microbes which fix nitrogen into the soil and help fertilise the other crops.
- **Could a blind bird be the Chicken of Tomorrow?**
    - The idea was explored in the 1980s using a line of birds which were born blind due to a genetic mutation. Like the ones in the Brazilian story, the chickens displayed no signs of feather-pecking or acts of cannibalism. “They did not appear to have any other obvious welfare problems, and they were more productive,”… “This seemed, so to speak, to be a win-win situation: Farmers would make more money and hens would live better lives.’ Bigger, faster and, for our benefit, even blind?”
    - **Among animal ethicists, this is called the “Blind Hens’ Challenge”.**
- **Since the advent of industrial fishing the decline of some fish species has been truly shocking; Pacific bluefin tuna down 97 percent from historic levels; and Mediterranean swordfish, 88 percent. In more recent times, keystone species such as the Pacific sardine have seen populations crash by as much as 95 percent.**
- The Green Revolution system is propped up by fossil fuels and government subsidies — our public money is supporting a system that isn’t resilient, healthy, or sustainable ($700B - $1T a year)
    - Subsidies too easily distort decisions on what the world grows and how it eats
- Our future food is going to depend on **multiple** systems (both highly industrialized and smaller scale farming) but the key is **wild genetics + rethinking the monoculture model: saving diversity gives us options**
- Research the slow food network